# (Prosper Loan Data)
## by (Fidelia Tubonibo)


## Dataset

>This dataset contains loan and borrower data from 113,937 loans listings in the USA.

#### Dataset Structure
There are 113,937 loan entries with 81 variables on each loan in this dataset. Most variables are numeric in nature, but other data types include: category, string, integer, float, boolean and datetime.

#### Features of interest
The main feature of interest is;
- Loan amount: The original amount of the loan
 
Other features in the dataset which support the features of interest include;
- Borrower's APR: The borrower's Annual Percentage Rate (APR) for the loan. This is the yearly interest generated by a sum charged to borrowers.
- Loan status: This is the current status of the loan
- Borrower Rate: This is the fee charged on borrowed capital
- Lender Yield: This is the annual rate of return obtained by a lender over the term of the loan
- Listing category: The category of the listing that the borrower selected when posting their listing. 
- Prosper score: A custom risk score built using historical Prosper data. The score ranges from 1-10, with 10 being the best, or lowest risk score and 1 being the highest risk.  
- Income range: The income range of the borrower at the time the listing was created.
- Employment status: The employment status of the borrower at the time they posted the listing.
- Home ownership: This registers if the borrower is a homeowner or not.
- Total Prosper Loans: Number of loans the borrower took at the time the listing was created 
- Outstanding principal:Total outstanding principal on prosper loans at the time listing was created 
- Borrowed principal:Total principal borrowed on prosper loans at the time the listing was created. 
- On-time prosper payments:Number of on time payments the borrower had made on Prosper loans at the time they created this listing. 
- Year: Year of loan origination
- Quarter: Annual quarter of loan origination

#### Preliminary Wrangling
The dataset was loaded into a dataframe named "loan_df" after which some wrangling was carried out to make the data suitable for exploration. These include:
1. Conversion of Listing creation date ,Closed date, First recorded credit line and Loan origination date columns to date-time data type.
2. Extraction of year and quarter from the Listing creation date column into separate columns name "Year" and "Quarter" respectively,
3. Conversion of Loan status, Prosper Rating (numeric), Prosper Rating (Alpha), Prosper Score, Listing Category (numeric), Loan Origination Quarter,Income Range and Quarter columns to category.
 
## Summary of Findings
- The loan outcome status with the most frequency is the current loan
- Loans of higher amount have a smaller count of borrowers
- The most popular loan amount is 4,000 USD
- Most loan collectors earn between 25,000- 49,999 USD
- Borrowers who are homeowners have a higher count
- Current loan status has the highest loan amount.
- The count of prosper scores shows that loans are usually collected for medium-risk ventures
- High risk prosper scores are shown to have smaller loan amounts as opposed to low risk prosper scores
- The relationship between loan status and income range shows that people who earn 100k and above get the most loans while people who are not employed get the least.
- As the number of prior loans taken by a borrower increases, the amount requested reduces.
- A high increase in loan amount is shown in the year 2013 which is indicative of an event that might have occurred.
- Borrowers with income range of 50,000-74,999 have the most count and distribution of APR
- The listing category with the most count and loan amount distribution is debt consolidation.
- People who are employed have the highest loan amounts while people who work part-time have the least loan amounts
- Lender yield reduces with an increase in loan amount. This is a feature of interest.
- The relationship between on-time payments and prosper score shows that low-risk ventures are more likely to pay back loans on time
- Borrowers with income range of 50,000-74,999 have the most count and distribution of APR
- There's a slight postive correlation between outstanding principal and borrowed principal
- There's a strong positive correlation between borrower APR and lender yield and a negative correlation between loan amount and both borrower APR and lender yield.
- Loan-seeking was at an all-time high in every quarter of 2013.


## Key Insights for Presentation

- The most popular loan amount is 4,000 USD
- People who earn 100k and above get the most loans while people who are not employed get the least.
- People who are employed have the highest loan amounts while people who work part-time have the least loan amounts
- Borrowers with income range of 50,000-74,999 have the most count and distribution of APR
- Loan-seeking was at an all-time high in every quarter of 2013.

1. An overview of the dataset is given.
2. A simple histogram is used to represent the distribution of the loan amounts
3. A subplot was used to display:
- A boxplot showing the relationship between loan amount and employment status
- A stripplot showing the relationship between loan amount and income range
4. A boxplot showing the relationship between income range and borrower APR
5. A facetgrid of boxplots showing the quarterly loan amount for each year

